# retroSpeak
A SP0256 speech synthesiser add-on board for Raspberry Pi A+ or B+ or v2

This is a very old-school style speech synthesiser add-on board for the Raspberry Pi. It 
uses the vintage General Instruments SP0256-AL2 IC that was popular in the 1980s. 
It was used in many DIY and commercial speech synthesisers that were interfaced to 
the microcomputers of the day. As it was sold in Maplin, Tandy and Radio Shack, it 
became quite popular.

Of course things have moved on and the Raspberry Pi is more than capable of doing
speech synthesis in software - this is certainly better quality than the speech that 
can be generated by this project. Use one of those if you want good speech synthesis.

retroSpeak is a bit of fun.

The project consists of:

* a PCB - look in the hardware folder for the Kicad design files
* Python Code - used to control the SP0256, and to implement a rudimentary text to speech system based on the NRL algorithm
* Documentation - a manual showing how to build the board, and install the code.

The PCB is in a Raspberry Pi HAT form factor - so will fit nicely on the newer style 
Raspberry Pi computers with the 40pin headers. I have tested it on the Raspberry Pi A+ and
Raspberry Pi B version 2. It uses an MCP23S17 port expander and an LTC6903 SPI controlled
oscillator. As it only uses the SPI port, the GPIO pins are available for other uses. It isn't a
real HAT as no identifying EEPROM is provided for. It could work with older Raspberries if you use a 26 way 
header and/or a ribbon cable adapter.

Audio output is independent of the Raspberry Pi, and uses an old-school LM386 amplifier outputting
through a speaker attached to a header on the PCB or through a 3.5mm stereo jack socket. It's 
very low-fi and a bit hissy/noisy.

The PCB uses all through-hole components apart from the LTC6903 oscillator. However this gives
the flexibility of varying the pitch/speed of the speech from a very slow/T-Rex style roar to manic
electronic chipmunk... The pitch can be changed while the SP0256 is speaking, or beforehand to simply
change the voice.

The most recent version of the PCB will allow up to 4 PCBs to be stacked for multiple voices. But this 
feature hasn't yet been tested.

The Python code is pretty simple. The main library controls the speech chip and oscillator, and to make it speak you simply
give it a string with allophone codes to make up what you want it to say. It will play them in the background if you 
wish, while your program does other things. A separate library has definitions of a simple vocabulary that 
gives the allophones for a number of words - mainly based on the list in the Radioshack/Archer datasheet. 
A very simple rule-based text-to-speech program is also provided.

